CEXT-6231: add app icon support spec (#461)
adobe/aio-commerce-sdk: specs/features/CEXT-6231-app-icon-support.md

# App Icon Support

- **Ticket:** [CEXT-6231](https://jira.corp.adobe.com/browse/CEXT-6231)
- **Created:** 2026-05-21
- [ ] **Implemented**

## Summary

Add an `icon` field to `app.commerce.config.ts` so Commerce app developers can
declare an icon for their app. The value is a relative path to a local image
file; the `pre-app-build` hook encodes it to a base64 data URL and bundles it
into the `app-config` action at build time, which exposes a dedicated
`/app-config/icon` endpoint that returns the data URL with aggressive browser
caching. The `app-config` response includes an `iconUrl` pointing to that endpoint,
making the icon appear in Commerce App Management for all distribution models.
For Exchange-listed apps that also declare an icon in their config, the

> SDK-declared icon takes precedence over the icon sourced from App Registry.

Reviewer: Even if the icon is small, I am sort of against bundling it. While it works, I don't think such an asset should be served as part of the action's code.

For me, a better alternative would be to use `include` and make App Builder deploy the icon as a file next to the action's code, which can then be read via `fs` module, and returned as preferred. 

<img width="1296" height="782" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/0952736c-cfcd-4ed9-8dd6-c745d841124d" />

  per-app icon data. Only a small `iconUrl` string is stored per app.
- Ensure the icon can be rendered inside Adobe Unified Shell without violating
  the `img-src` Content Security Policy.

**Non-goals:**

- Supporting arbitrary external image hosting. The `icon` field accepts only a
  relative path to a local file; the SDK deploys it at build time. Arbitrary
  external URLs cannot be deployed by the SDK and introduce URL rot risk — the
  icon would silently break if the external host goes offline.
- Icon resizing. Only PNG and JPG files under 1 MB and exactly 48×48 px are
  accepted, consistent with the minimum Adobe Exchange listing requirement.
- Icon management outside of the deploy cycle (e.g. updating an icon without
  redeploying the app).

## Developer experience

A developer adds an `icon` field under `metadata` in `app.commerce.config.ts`:

```typescript
import { defineConfig } from "@adobe/aio-commerce-lib-app/config";

export default defineConfig({
  metadata: {
    id: "my-commerce-app",
    displayName: "My Commerce App",
    description: "Extends Commerce checkout with fraud scoring.",
    version: "1.0.0",
    icon: "assets/icon.png",
  },
});
```

> The value is a path relative to the project root. The `pre-app-build` hook

Reviewer: These are equivalent, but I feel it's clearer this way.

```suggestion
The value is a path relative to the `app.commerce.config` file. The `pre-app-build` hook
```

```

```
✖ metadata.icon: icon must be 48×48 px (actual: 32×20 px).
```

## Design

### Schema change

`MetadataSchema` in
`packages/aio-commerce-lib-app/source/config/schema/metadata.ts` gains a new
optional field:

```typescript
icon: v.optional(
  v.pipe(
    v.string(),
    v.regex(
      /^(?!https?:\/\/|\/)\S+\.(?:png|jpe?g)$/i,
      'must be a relative path to a PNG or JPG file (e.g. "assets/icon.png")',
    ),
  ),
);
```

The regex rejects values that start with `http://`, `https://`, or `/`, and
requires the path to end with `.png`, `.jpg`, or `.jpeg` (case-insensitive),
consistent with the formats accepted by Adobe Exchange listings.

### Pre-build validation

The `pre-app-build` hook already reads `app.commerce.config.ts` to generate
`ext.config.yaml`. When `metadata.icon` is set, the hook additionally:

1. Resolves the path relative to the project root
2. Checks the file exists — fails with a clear error if not
3. Checks the file size is ≤ 1 MB — fails with a clear error if not
4. Reads the image dimensions using the `image-size` package (reads only the
   file header, supports PNG and JPEG) and checks they are exactly 48×48 px —
   fails with a clear error if not

> 5. Adds the icon file to the `include` list of the `app-config` action in the

Reviewer: Do we need a lib for this? Isn't there any utility in `fs` that can also give the size of the image? In the end it's just a file in the filesystem.

Author: `fs.stat` gives bytes, not width×height. Getting pixel
dimensions requires parsing the image header, which is exactly what `image-size` does.

   generated `ext.config.yaml`, so App Builder deploys it as a file alongside
   the action code:

```yaml
actions:
  app-config:
    function: actions/app-config/index.js
    include:

>       - ["assets/icon.png", "assets/icon.png"]

Reviewer: Take a look at [this thread](https://magento.slack.com/archives/C013UDBFBGB/p1768326478624029) when deciding how to map this path.

    web: "yes"
```

This runs before any build or deploy step, giving the developer immediate
feedback without wasting a full build cycle. The icon is fully self-contained
in the deployed action — no CDN or external dependency at runtime.

### Icon endpoint

The icon file is deployed alongside the `app-config` action code via the
`include` mechanism in `ext.config.yaml`. At request time, the action reads it
from the filesystem using the `fs` module and returns the binary content.

The `app-config` action exposes a new public `GET /icon` route (path:
`/app-config/icon`) that returns the binary image with the appropriate
`Content-Type` (`image/png` or `image/jpeg`) and
`Cache-Control: public, max-age=86400`. The route is a public web action — no
auth is required, as icons are not sensitive, and `<img src>` cannot send
authentication headers.

The `app-config` response includes an `iconUrl` field whose value is the

> fully-qualified URL of this endpoint:

Reviewer: Do we need this? In the end the UI already knows the endpoint of the `app-config` via `workerProcess`, in the end it's just appending `/icon` to it isn't it?

Author: I prefer we keep it so the consumers (UI) do not need to apply any resolution logic, in case that eventually we change to CDN approach where the domain would change.

propagates within a day. The URL has no cache-busting hash (the path is stable
across deploys), so `immutable` would be incorrect.

### Commerce App Management

Commerce App Management renders the icon directly from `iconUrl`:

```html
<img src="{iconUrl}" />
```

This requires `*.adobeioruntime.net` to be present in the `img-src` directive
of the Commerce App Management SPA CSP configuration in the Adobe Experience
Cloud Developer Portal. Commerce App Management already has
`*.adobeioruntime.net` in `connect-src`; adding it to `img-src` is a one-time
configuration change with no code impact.

The association flow's icon precedence logic does need to be adjusted. The
app's `AppConfig` (fetched from `app-config`) is already available at
association time, making `iconUrl` a natural insertion point. `app-config`
should become the authoritative source, with the existing `app.icon` field from
App Registry (populated only for Exchange-listed apps) as a fallback for apps
that have an Exchange listing but have not yet declared an icon in their config.

### Edge cases

- **Icon field absent** — no `iconUrl` in the `app-config` response; App

>   Management renders the existing gray placeholder.

Reviewer: Do we want to mix App Management UI things in this spec?

Author: Form my perspective is ok to keep App Management concerns without entering into implementation details since it is the main consumer of this API it needs to make sense.

- **App redeployed with a different icon** — the new file is deployed alongside
  the action; it is served immediately after redeployment. Browsers that cached
  the previous icon response may continue to show the old icon for up to 24

>   hours (the `max-age` TTL).

Reviewer: Is there a way to invalidate cache that this spec can define?

Author: Yes — the spec now uses content-hash cache-busting. `pre-app-build` computes the first 8 hex chars of the icon file's SHA-256 and stores it alongside the icon. The action reads it at startup and appends it as `?v={hash}` when constructing `iconUrl`, so the URL changes whenever the icon content changes. Because the URL is now content-addressed, `Cache-Control` has been upgraded to `public, max-age=31536000, immutable`. A redeployed icon gets a new hash and a new URL, so browsers fetch it fresh immediately — no stale period.
